 © 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b498 
 
ETHIOPIAN COFFEE LEAF DISEASES 
IDENTIFICATION USING DEEP LEARNING 
FEATURES 
1Linigerew Mengstie Shita, 2 Prof. Mogalla Shashi 
1Email: linigerew2006@gmail.com 
1M.Tech, AU College of Engineering (A), Department of Information Technology, Visakhapatnam, India 
2 Professor, AU College of Engineering (A), Department of CS and SE, Visakhapatnam, India 
ABSTRACT: Coffee is the majorly traded commodity used by one–third of the world’s population as a beverage and 
Ethiopia is the home land of coffee arabica, it covers 7-10 % of the world’s coffee production. This research work,  
focuses on the four major types of coffee leaf diseases that reduces coffee production in Ethiopia ,these are brown eye 
spot (BES),coffee berry disease (CBD),coffee leaf rust (CLR) and coffee wilt disease (CWD).In this paper ,we proposed 
Ethiopian coffee leaf diseases identification using deep learning features. The images of the coffee leaf diseases were 
captured from the regions of Ethiopia where more coffee is produced, i.e. Jimma and Zegie. We compared gaussian 
filtering, median filtering and the hybrid of the two filtering techniques to remove noises from coffee leaf images and 
we have got better result from the hybrid of the two filtering techniques. And also we applied KMeans clustering for 
segmentation and CNN for feature extraction. Finally, we made a comparison between CNN-Softmax classifier and 
CNN-SVM classifier .The experimental results showed that SVM performs better than softmax classifier in terms of 
performance and computational time. Our proposed model with SVM classifier achieved an overall classification 
accuracy of 96.5%. 
Keywords: Ethiopian coffee, SVM, CNN, coffee disease 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Coffee is the most important traded commodities next to petroleum and also consumed as a beverage by one third of the 
world’s population (Yimeru, 2020). Now day’s coffee uses as an input in some food processing industries, for instance 
it is used as flavoring to various pastries, ice-creams, chocolate, candies (Mengsitu et al, 2016; Aebissa, 2012). ). The 
genus Coffea consists of over 125 species in the world (Krishnan, 2017). Among all these species only the three species 
of Coffea are economically important such as Arabica L. (Arabica coffee) presently accounting for about 60% of world 
trade; C. Canephora  (Robusta coffee), accounting for most of the rest of the trade and C. Liberica  (Liberian coffee) 
contributing less than one percent (1%) (Waller et al, 2007). 
 
The coffee cultivation sector consists the wider range in the Ethiopian agriculture. Ethiopia is the largest producer of 
coffee in Sub-Saharan Africa and is the fifth largest coffee producer in the world next to Brazil, Vietnam, Colombia, 
and Indonesia, contributing about 7-10% of the total world coffee production (Yimeru, 2020; Teferi, 2018; Ayalew, 
2014,and ICO, 2018). But if we consider only coffee Arabica, Ethiopia is the third largest coffee producer developing 
country next to Brazil and Colombia. The Ethiopian culture has a greatest dependency on the coffee ceremony and coffee 
takes a lion share in Ethiopian economy (Yimeru, 2020).  
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b499 
 
Coffee product can be degraded in Ethiopia due to different factors, especially due to coffee plant diseases like Brown 
Eye Spot (BES), Coffee Berry Disease (CBD), Coffee Leaf Rust (CLR), Coffee Wilt Disease (CWD), etc. Brown Eye 
Spot (BES is caused by the Cercospora coffeicola fungus. It creates round brown spots on the foliage which develops a 
gray-brown center with a red-brown margin and may be surrounded by yellow lesions (Sorte et al., 2019). Coffee berry 
disease (CBD) is a disease caused by the Colletotrichum kahawae fungal pathogen. This diseases develop smaller, water 
soaked lesions on the young, growing berries that quickly become dark brown or black and slightly sunken (Teferi, 
2018). Coffee Leaf Rust (CLR) is a fungal disease caused by the fungus called Hemileia vastatrix that demolish the 
coffee plant at its peak growing levels (Rutherford & Phiri, 2006). The pathogen mostly affects the leaves of the coffee 
and causes chlorotic lesions or yellow powdery pustules on the underside of the leaves which reduces photosynthetic 
area of the plant. Coffee Wilt Disease (CWD) is caused by the Fusarium xylarioides fungus (Hindorf & Omondi, 2011; 
Rutherford & Phiri, 2006). The first symptoms of CWD are yellowing, folding and inward curling of the leaves. Then, 
the leaves become limped, dry up and turned into brown and ultimately drop off, lastly the trees completely become 
leafless. 
 
Based on the fact that most of the plant leaves has been used as a source of food for the growing of a plant by the process 
of photosynthesis, disease in leaf affects the photosynthesis process thereby leading to plant death (Arivazhagan&Ligi, 
2018).  A timely and accurate identification of plant diseases plays an important role in preventing the loss of 
productivity of agricultural products (TURKOGL& HANBAY, 2019). The oldest system for identification of plant 
diseases was time consuming, ineffective, and expensive and labor intensive and error prone (Arivazhagan&Ligi, 2018 
and Alemayehu, 2017). 
Now a day’s, the use of modern technologies in the agriculture industry have an important contribution to help 
agricultural experts. One of the emerging technologies is the use of image processing or computer vision for the 
identification of different plant diseases.  
 
Image based disease analysis approach has much importance over the traditional one because of its effectiveness, 
efficiency and non-subjectivity. Image processing is the technique which is used for measuring affected area of disease, 
and to determine the difference in the color of the affected area. 
The deep learning approach clearly the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is an outstanding tool for resolving 
computer vision problems for a variety number of application areas. CNN is does not required hand-crafted feature 
extraction (Yamashita et al., 2018) because it performs both feature extraction and classification by itself 
(Arivazhagan&Ligi,2018  ) and also it has a great ability to extract robust and high-level features due to its multiple 
convolution and pooling layers. 
 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Image processing technique plays a vital role in the area of agricultural industry to diagnosis plant diseases 
at different stages of production. Now a day’s, deep CNN approaches, becomes the most powerful machine 
learning technique in image processing. The authors (TUROGLU&HANBAY, 2019), proposed automatic 
plant diseases and pest detection using deep learning features. They were used transfer learning and deep 
feature extraction methods. The extracted features using deep learning are classified by support vector 
machine (SVM), extreme learning machine (ELM) and K-nearest neighbor (KNN) classification methods. 
Finally, the authors concluded that the CNN feature extraction with support vector machine (SVM) 
classification gives better results than transfer learning methods. 
 
The paper studied by (Jadhav et al., 2020), presented an automated system for identifying the soybean 
diseases using a transfer learning approaches for the pre-trained deep learning AlexNet and GoogleNet 
classification. In this research work, the authors modified the last three layers of the GoogleNet and make 
modifications on some CNN parameters like learning rate, number of epochs and the number of iterations 
to enhance the classification performance. Finally, the authors used fivefold-cross validation methods for 
evaluating the performance of the classifier and they achieved an accuracy of 98.75% and 96.25% for 
GoogleNet and AlexNet respectively. The work done by (Arivazhagan & Ligi, 2018), proposed an 
automated mango leaf diseases identification using deep learning based approach. In this research work, 
the authors applied CNN for both feature extraction and classification. Finally they achieved an overall 
accuracy of 96.67% for identifying the mango leaf diseases. 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b500 
 
The research work done by (Yimeru ,2020),  the author developed automatic identification of diseases and pest damage 
from the leaf and berry parts of the coffee plant using image processing and machine learning. The author used two 
color space (such as L*a*b and YCbCr color spaces) and texture filter segmentation algorithm .He was applied 
feedforward artificial neural network (ANN) to classify coffee plant diseases and pests. ANN result was compared to 
the results obtained from support vector machine and K-nearest neighbor classification algorithms. Finally, ANN 
performed better performance and achieved an overall classification accuracy of 91.9%. In (Sorte et al, 2019), the 
authors proposed an automatic coffee plant diseases recognition system for Cercospora (brown eye sport) and coffee 
leaf rust diseases. They were used two texture attribute extraction approaches GLCM and LBP and also the texture 
vector computed for a set of images and used as an input for the feed forward neural network. The results compared to 
the recognition rate of CNN without extraction of texture attributes. At the end, the CNN approach showed better 
results than texture extraction methods with sufficient training dataset samples. 
The authors Manso et al., (2019)  have been developed a mobile phone system (App) to detect and classify the coffee 
leaf rust and coffee leaf miner and automatically identify or calculate the degree of severity. They applied k-means 
clustering, Otsu Algorithm, and iterative threshold algorithm over the two color spaces (such as HSV and YCbCr color 
spaces) for segmenting the diseases and pests from the healthy parts of the coffee leaves. They trained the model using 
artificial neural network (ANN), Back propagation neural network (BPNN) and Extreme learning machine (ELM). 
Finally, the results of ELM is slightly better than ANN and BPNN. Vassallo-Barco et al., (2019) presented automatic 
identification of nutritional deficiencies for Calcium (Ca), Iron (Fe), Boron (B), and potassium (K) using shape and 
texture descriptors in images of coffee plant leaves. The authors used Otsu’s method of segmentation and Blurred 
Shape Method (BSM) with Gray-level Co-occurrence matrix (GCM) feature extraction. Then extracted features 
classified using KNN, Naïve Bayes and Neural network classification algorithms. Finally, they obtained good accuracy 
associated with Boron (B) and Iron (Fe) deficiencies but they got poor results for Calcium (Ca) and Potassium (K) 
deficiencies. 
The authors (Mengsitu et al., 2016), proposed automatic identification of the three major Ethiopian coffee leaf diseases 
using image processing. They used five different segmentation techniques such as Otsu, K-means, Gaussian 
distribution, FCM and the combination of Gaussian distribution and K-means clustering. The authors applied Gray-
level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) and color features for extracting features from Ethiopian coffee leaves but they 
used traditional features like color, shape and texture, these features gives poor performance when used alone 
(TUROGLU&HANBAY, 2019). And they trained the model using artificial neural network (ANN), Naïve Bayes and 
SOM and RBF. Finally, the combination of Gaussian distribution and K-means clustering with the hybrid of SOM and 
RBF classification methods gives better accuracy of 92.10%.
3. STATEMENT OF PROBLEM 
 
Agriculture is the most important economic activity in Ethiopia and one of the most important agricultural exports are 
coffee crop products. But Coffee production is constrained by many factors, including losses due to damage caused by 
diseases like brown eye spot (BES), coffee berry diseases (CBD), coffee leaf rest (CLR), coffee wilt diseases 
(CWD),and others. The methods of coffee diseases identification in Ethiopia is through a traditional inspection and 
previous experiences which are subjective and non-efficient (Aycheh, 2008). The advanced solution is automating the 
diseases identification and classification process using different algorithms or approaches. There are previous studies 
on plant diseases recognition and identification technique using imaging and machine learning including coffee plants. 
 
The paper studied by (Mengsitu et al., 2016), the authors proposed automatic identification of the three major Ethiopian 
coffee plant diseases but they used a traditional feature extraction methods such as color, shape and texture features. 
These traditional methods had very low performance when used alone (TURKOGL& HANBAY, 2019). Deep learning 
features have better performance over traditional feature extraction methods. This study will try to address the 
following questions: 
 
Which preprocessing technique is suitable for Ethiopian coffee plant diseases identification? 
 
Which classification Algorithm is suitable for Ethiopian coffee plant diseases classification? 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b501 
 
4. EXPERIMENTATION 
4.1. Materials and Tools 
For collecting images of Ethiopian coffee leaf images, we used Redmi note 6 pro smart phones. When we capture the 
Ethiopian coffee leaf images, we fix the smartphone on a stand to reduce hand movement and helps to capture uniform 
images of Ethiopian coffee leaves. The Research work done by (Mengsitu et al., 2016 ), we captured the Ethiopian 
coffee leaf image at a distance of 130mm from the coffee plant up to the smartphone camera for better coffee plant 
image quality. The required Ethiopian coffee images are collected from the most coffee producer regions of Ethiopia 
i.e. from Jimma and Zegie. The labeling process is done by experts found in vegetable and fruit health clinic in Amhara 
region, because of some of the diseases looks similar depending on the infection status. 
4.2. Implementation tools 
4.2.1. Programming Language 
We used python programming language for our research work. Python is an open source and the most powerful 
programming language for image processing or computer visions. 
4.2.2. Development Tools 
Experimentation was carried out on the keras prototype with Tensorflow backend on window’s 10 pro operating system 
with Intel(R) Core(TM) i3, 4GB RAM and    2.40 GHz processor. 
 
4.3. Design Of Coffee Image Identification Model 
The proposed model architecture for Ethiopian coffee leaf diseases identification consists of a series of steps; namely 
image acquisition, preprocessing, segmentation, feature extraction and identification (classification). The architecture 
for the proposed model is graphically represented in figure 1 below. The first step in any image processing system is 
image acquisition. As shown in figure 1, there are two phases; the training phase and the testing phase. The training 
phase starts before the testing phase to train the proposed model whereas the testing phase follows the preceding 
training phase to evaluate the trained model performances by giving new dataset image. The proposed model starts by 
taking the whole Ethiopian coffee leaf image dataset for preprocessing. In preprocessing step, image resizing, noise 
removal by using gaussian filtering, median filtering and the combination of gaussian filtering and median filtering is 
applied  to select the best filtering technique. After preprocessing, the next step is image augmentation. Image 
augmentation helps to prevent overfitting by increasing the number coffee leaf images, and then splitting the 
augmented coffee leaf image dataset into 80% train dataset and 20% test dataset. These train dataset and test dataset 
are segmented parallelly using KMeans clustering segmentation methods. The next major task is feature extraction, 
extracting useful information from the segmented coffee dataset for both train and test data using CNN. CNN mainly 
composed of three layers, these are Convolution layer, pooling layer and fully connected layers .The convolution and 
pooling layer used for feature extraction and the fully connected layer is used for classification .Finally, the extracted 
features from the train dataset feed into the Softmax and SVM classifier to train the model and then the extracted 
features from the test dataset feed into the previously trained Softmax and SVM classifier. 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b502 
 
 
 
Figure 1 .The proposed model architecture 
 
4.3.1. Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) 
 
CNN is a feedforward multilayered hierarchical neural network which has shown good performance on different 
competitions related to Computer Vision and Image Processing (Khan et al.,2020). The most crucial attributes of the 
CNN are hierarchical learning, automatic feature extraction, multi-tasking, and weight sharing (Khan et al., 2020). A 
typical CNN architecture composed of repetitions of a stack of numerous convolution layers and a pooling layer, 
followed by one or more fully connected layers existing in between input and output layers (Yamashita et al., 2018, 
Sultana et al., 2018). 
 
The Convolution and pooling layer of a CNN are helps to extract useful features from an input image, and the fully 
connected layers are receive the extracted features from all previous neurons as input to map them in to the output 
layer. In addition to the core CNN layers, batch normalization and dropout are also incorporated to enhance CNN 
performance. In this paper, we have used three convolution layer, three pooling layer and two fully connected layers. 
The last fully connected layer is the same as the class labels. To solve the problem of overfitting in our CNN model, 
we used Dropout layer below each Maxpooling layers and also we used on the first fully connected layer. 
The convolution layer is the basic layer of CNN that performs convolution operation. It extracts meaningful features 
from an input image. We have used 96, 64, and 32 number of filters sizes and a 5x5 and 3x3 kernel size to extract 
features from coffee leaf image. The pooling layer is another layer of CNN that performs down sampling operations. 
This layer takes the convolutional output as an input and subsamples it to reduce the in-plane dimensionality of the 
feature maps (input images), number of parameters and the computational complexity of the model. We used 2x2 pool 
size for the first two pooling layers and a 3x3 pool size for the last pooling layer.  
 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b503 
 
Activation function is a non-linearity mapping operation that helps to accelerate the learning process of our CNN 
model. We have used the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) non-linearity activation function. ReLU is the most common 
and more efficient non-linearity activation function than sigmod or hyperbolic activation functions (Sorte et al., 2019). 
Dropout is the mechanism of preventing or reducing overfitting on the training dataset by randomly skipping some 
units or connections. We used a dropout layer after each Maxpooling layer and also after the flatten layers with a 
dropping probability of 0.25 for the first two dropout layer and we used 0.3 dropping probability for the rest layers. 
Batch Normalization is a normalization technique used to speed up the learning process of the CNN by controlling the 
change in the distribution of the hidden layer values by setting a learning rate to small values for minimizing the 
convergence time (Khan et al., 2020). 
 
 
Figure 2. The proposed CNN model architecture 
5. RESULTS 
5.1. The proposed CNN model Experimental results using Softmax Classifier 
 
In this experiment, we divide the total coffee image dataset into three various sets, train set, test set and validation set. 
Primarily, we partitioned the whole coffee image dataset into 80/20 for training phase and test phase respectively. After 
these, again we divide the 80% training phase dataset into 80/20 for training and validation. Finally, we have got 1280 
coffee images (320 images for each class) for training, 320 coffee images (80 images for each class) for validation and 
400 coffee images (100 coffee images for each class) for testing. We trained the model for 20 epochs, batch size of 32, 
and an initial learning rate of 0.001 (1e-3).We perform three experiments with the end to end CNN for comparing the 
three filtering techniques. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b504 
 
5.1.1. Comparison between noise filtering techniques 
In this sub section, we made three experiments for choosing the best preprocessing techniques. We compared Gaussian 
Filtering (GF), Median Filtering (MF) and the hybrid of the two (GF-MF) filtering techniques using the proposed end 
to end CNN model .We have got experimental results of  92.5%, 90.5% and 95.75% accuracy for  the GF, MF and 
GF-MF filtering techniques respectively. The GF-MF filtering technique is better than the two individual techniques 
because it gains the advantages of GF filtering for removing the gaussian noises and the advantages of MF filtering for 
removing the Salt and pepper noises. Therefore, we have used GF-MF filtering for the rest of our experiment. 
Table 1.  Comparison between noise filtering techniques 
 
Experiment number 
  
Type of filtering 
techniques used 
 
Accuracy in 
(percentage) 
 
Experiment 1 
 
GF 
 
92.5% 
 
Experiment 2 
 
MF 
 
90.5% 
 
Experiment 3 
 
GF-MF 
 
95.75% 
 
5.1.2. Performance of the proposed CNN model 
 
In this sub section, we made an experiment for measuring the training, validation and testing accuracy of the proposed 
CNN model. This experiment is done using the combination of GF-MF filtering techniques. We trained the proposed 
CNN with 1280 training coffee images and 320 validation coffee images, and we test the trained model with 400 coffee 
images. The model validation is done at the end of each epochs while the model trains every time per epoch. Finally, 
at the end of the last epochs (epochs 20), our CNN model achieved a training accuracy of 98.25%, validation accuracy 
of 96.88% and testing accuracy of 95.75%.  
 
 
Figure 3. The precision, recall and f1_score of the end to end CNN 
 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b505 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Confusion matrix of the testing performance of our  CNN model using softmax classifier 
 
5.2. Experimental results using SVM Classifier 
The total time taken to train the proposed CNN model using Softmax classifier is around 6 hours approximately 950 
seconds per epoch. So, using CNN for the classification takes huge computational time. As a result, we need to use the 
SVM Classifier after the flatten layers of the proposed CNN model architecture. We used radial basis function (rbf) 
kernel function to use SVM classifier in our multiclass classification.  
In this experiment, we have used the proposed CNN for feature extraction and SVM for classification and we have 
achieved 96.5 % accuracy. This accuracy is greater than the proposed CNN model with Softmax classifier by 0.75 %. 
The CNN-SVM model takes less processing time compared with the CNN-Softmax model. The precision, recall, f1-
score and confusion matrix for this experiment is presented in Figure 5 and 6 respectively. 
 
Figure 5. The precision, recall, and f1-score of the proposed CNN with SVM classifier 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b506 
 
 
Figure 6. The confusion matrix of the proposed CNN model with SVM classifier 
Table 2. Comparison between Softmax and Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier 
 
Feature extraction 
 
Classifier 
 
Accuracy 
 
Computational 
time 
CNN 
Softmax 
95.75% 
6 hrs. 
CNN 
SVM 
96.5% 
Max. ½ hrs. 
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Coffee is the majorly traded commodity used by one –third of the world’s population as a beverage. Coffee is the 
backbone of the Ethiopian economy that covers 7-10% of the world’s coffee production, and it is the first exported 
commodity in Ethiopia. To maximize the revenues from the sales of coffee crops, the major hazards or treats that 
hinder its production (i.e. coffee diseases) should be controlled. 
Coffee disease is the major treats that affects the quality and quantity of coffee production in Ethiopia. Some of the 
most common coffee diseases that cause damage to coffee production are brown eyespot (BES), coffee berry diseases 
(CBD), coffee leaf rust (CLR) and coffee wilt diseases (CWD). In order to control the damages caused by these 
diseases, an accurate and timely diagnosis and identification of the diseases type is very important. The main objective 
of this thesis work is to develop an automated Ethiopian coffee leaf diseases identification via image processing and 
deep learning features. For this study, we proposed a model architecture that encompasses preprocessing, 
segmentation, feature extraction, and identification phases. 
The preprocessing phase reduces the size of the input coffee image into 244x244 and removed noises from the coffee 
image using GF, MF and the combination of GF-MF filtering techniques. Then GF-MF filtering performs better than 
GF and MF filtering techniques. In the segmentation phase, we used KMeans clustering segmentation algorithm to 
outline the damaged regions of coffee leaves. 
The third phases of the proposed model architecture is feature extraction. We used CNN feature extraction to extract 
high-level features from the segmented coffee images and stored these features as a feature set in the database. After 
feature extraction, the classification phase is built using softmax and SVM classifier. The experimental results showed 
that the proposed CNN feature extraction model with SVM classifier performs better than softmax classifiers and 
achieved an overall classification accuracy of 96.5%. This study focuses only on the leaf parts of the coffee plant 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b507 
 
diseases. We recommend for future studies can extend this research work by incorporating additional classes (roots, 
stems) and new feature extraction and classification machine learning algorithms. 
7. References 
Alemayehu Hiwot Desta.” Development of Automatic Sesame Grain Classification and Grading System Using Image 
Processing Techniques” Addis Ababa University (2017) 
Arivazhagan, S., & Ligi, S. V. (2018). Mango leaf diseases identification using convolutional neural network. Int. J. 
Pure Appl. Math, 120(6), 11067-11079. 
Ayalew, T. "Characterization of organic coffee production, certification and marketing system: Ethiopia as a main 
indicator: a review." Asian Journal of Agriculture Research 8.4 (2014): 170-180. 
Aycheh, Habtamu Minassie. "Image analysis for Ethiopian coffee classification." Addis Ababa University (2008). 
Hindorf, H., & Omondi, C. O. (2011). A review of three major fungal diseases of Coffea arabica L. in the rainforests 
of Ethiopia and progress in breeding for resistance in Kenya. Journal of Advanced Research, 2(2), 109–120. 
doi:10.1016/j.jare.2010.08.006 
ICO. (2018). Coffee market report: December 2018. 1–8. http://www.ico.org/Market- Report-18-19-e.asp 
Jadhav, S. B., Udupi, V. R., & Patil, S. B. (2020). Identification of plant diseases using convolutional neural 
networks. International Journal of Information Technology, 1-10. 
Khan, A., Sohail, A., Zahoora, U. et al. A survey of the recent architectures of deep convolutional neural networks. 
Artif Intell Rev 53, 5455–5516 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-020-09825 
 
Manso, G. L., Knidel, H., Krohling, R. A., & Ventura, J. A. (2019). A smartphone application to detection and 
classification of coffee leaf miner and coffee leaf rust. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00742. 
Mengistu, A. D., Mengistu, S. G., & Alemayehu, D. M. (2016). Image analysis for Ethiopian coffee plant diseases 
identification. International Journal of Biometrics and Bioinformatics (IJBB), 10(1), 1. 
Rutherford, Mike A., and Noah Phiri. "Pests and diseases of coffee in Eastern Africa: A technical and advisory 
manual." Wallingford, UK: CAB International (2006). 
Soni, H., & Sankhe, D. (2019). Image Restoration using Adaptive Median Filtering. Image, 6(10). 
Sorte, L. X. B., Ferraz, C. T., Fambrini, F., dos Reis Goulart, R., & Saito, J. H. (2019). Coffee leaf disease recognition 
based on deep learning and texture attributes. Procedia Computer Science, 159, 135-144. 
Sultana, F., Sufian, A., & Dutta, P. (2018, November). Advancements in image classification using convolutional 
neural network. In 2018 Fourth International Conference on Research in Computational Intelligence and 
Communication Networks (ICRCICN) (pp. 122-129). IEEE. 
Teferi Demelash (2018). Status of Major Coffee Diseases of Coffea Arabica L. in Afromontane Rainforests of Ethiopia. 
A Review 
TÜRKOĞLU, M., & Hanbay, D. (2019). Plant disease and pest detection using deep learning-based features. Turkish 
Journal of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences, 27(3), 1636-1651. 
Vassallo-Barco, M., Vives-Garnique, L., Tuesta-Monteza, V., Mejía-Cabrera, H. I., & Toledo, R. Y. (2017). Automatic 
Detection of Nutritional Deficiencies In Coffee Tree Leaves Through Shape And Texture Descriptors. Journal of 
Digital Information Management, 15(1). 
Waller, J. M., Bigger, M., & Hillocks, R. J. (2007). Coffee pests, diseases and their management. CABI. 
© 2021 JETIR October 2021, Volume 8, Issue 10                                                   www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR2110156 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
b508 
 
Yamashita, R., Nishio, M., Do, R. K. G., & Togashi, K. (2018). Convolutional neural networks: an overview and 
application in radiology. Insights into imaging, 9(4), 611-629. 
Yamashita, R., Nishio, M., Do, R. K. G., & Togashi, K. (2018). Convolutional neural networks: an overview and 
application in radiology. Insights into imaging, 9(4), 611-629. 
Yimeru Abnet Kifle “Automatic Coffee Disease and Pest Damage Identification.” Addis Ababa University (2020) 
